Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
Section 80C of Income Tax Act - 80C Deduction List
Section 80C of Income Tax Act - 80C Deduction List
Section 80C deductions allow taxpayers to reduce their taxable income by investing in specified instruments or making eligible payments. Under Section 80C of the
can claim deductions of up to Rs. 1.5 lakh for investments such as PPF, ELSS, life insurance premiums, NSC, home loan principal repayment, and children’s tuition fees.
Section 80C is one of the most widely used
provisions in India because it covers both investments and essential expenses. By strategically investing in eligible instruments, taxpayers can significantly lower their taxable income while building long-term savings.
However, deductions under Section 80C are available only under the old tax regime. Taxpayers opting for the
The following investments and expenses can be claimed as Section 80C Deductions:
Employee Provident Fund (EPF) contributions
Stamp duty and registration charges on property purchase
However, a combined deduction of up to Rs. 1.5 lakh is allowed for the above investments and expenses.
The maximum deduction available under Section 80C is Rs. 1,50,000 per financial year. This limit is applicable to the total combined amount invested across all eligible instruments and expenses.
The total deduction allowed will be Rs. 1.5 lakh, which is the maximum allowed under Section 80C and not he actual Rs. 1.7 lakh invested.
However, you can claim an additional deduction of Rs. 50,000 under Section 80CCD(1B) for contributions made to the
(NPS). Therefore, the total maximum deduction available under Sections 80C, 80CCC, 80CCD(1), and
ELSS, PPF or EPF, life insurance premium, home loan principal, SSY, NSC, SCSS
Contributions to notified pension schemes such as Atal Pension Yojana
The following table compares the various features of section 80C deduction options, easy for taxpayers to choose the most suitable option for them.
5 years (can be extended for other 3 years)
Till girl child reaches 21 years of age (partial withdrawal allowed when she reached 18 years)
The maximum section 80C deduction limit is Rs. 1.5 lakh per Financial Year for all the above deductions combined.
Only individuals and HUFs are eligible to claim Section 80C deductions. Companies, Firms, LLPs, etc. are not allowed to claim the Section 80C deductions.
The ceiling limit of Rs. 1.5 lakh was fixed in the year 2014, more than 10 years now. More often than not, taxpayers and professionals alike opine that the aforesaid limit is quite outdated. Investments in very few options easily exhausts the maximum limit. Therefore, a relaxation of limits will help taxpayers to optimize tax deductions and maximize their returns.
No, deductions under Section 80C are not available if a taxpayer opts for the new tax regime. Taxpayers can claim deductions under Section 80C of the Income Tax Act only when they opt for the old tax regime.
It is important to understand and comply with the following points to claim Section 80C deductions:
Invest in eligible instruments before 31st March of the financial year.
Collect proofs such as deposit slips, insurance premium receipts, ELSS statements, etc.
Declare investments to your employer to adjust TDS.
File ITR and report investments under “Deductions under Chapter VI-A”.
tax filing tool to help you claim deductions and ensure easy tax filing and compliance. Our
Let us understand how section 80C helps in reducing tax implications using an example.
Mr. A has a salary income of Rs. 10 lakhs and other income of Rs. 1 lakh. He has invested Rs. 1.5 lakh in PPF.
The difference in tax implications when 80C deductions are claimed and not claimed is explained below:
Therefore, by claiming a deduction of Rs. 1.5 lakh under Section 80C,
to optimise tax savings and determine taxes.
Maximize Your Refund, Minimize The Effort.
Can I claim the 80C deductions at the time of filing the return in case I have not submitted proof to my employer?
Yes. You can still claim those investments when you file your income tax return if not submitted to your employer. Just make sure the investments were made before the end of the financial year, i.e 31st March 2026
I have made an 80C investment on 30 April 2025. For which year can I claim this investment as a deduction?
You can claim deduction for the investments made in the ITR of that financial year. So, let's say you made an investment on April 30, 2025, you can claim it as a deduction when filing your taxes for the FY 2025-2026.
Can a company or a firm take benefit of Section 80C?
The provisions of Section 80C apply only to individuals or a Hindu Undivided Family (HUF). Hence, a company or a firm cannot take benefit of Section 80C.
I have been paying life insurance premiums to a private insurance company. Can I claim an 80C deduction for the premium paid?
Yes, you can get a deduction under Section 80C when you pay life insurance premiums to any insurance company approved by the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority of India, whether they are public or private.
In which year can I claim a deduction of the stamp duty paid for the purchase of a house property?
You can go ahead claiming the stamp duty for the purchase of a house in the year in which the payment is made towards stamp duty under Section 80C.
What do you mean by 80C deduction under chapter VI A?
Investments made in specified modes are eligible for deduction under section 80C. Popular investments eligible for this deduction are investment in Public Provident Fund (PPF), National saving certificate (NSC), Sukanya Samriddhi Yojana (SSY), etc.,
Section 80CCD (1) allows deductions for NPS contributions at a maximum of 10% (20% for self employed) of basic salary plus dearness allowance, subject to Rs 1.5 lakh maximum limit of section 80C.
Section 80CCD(2) allows deductions for employers' contributions made to the pension scheme, maximum up to 14% (under new regime) and 10% (under old regime) of total income can be availed.
Yes. You can claim deductions under both sections 80C and 80D of the Income Tax Act, 1961.
What is the maximum Section 80C deduction limit?
The maximum section 80C deduction limit available to a taxpayer is Rs. 1,50,000 per financial year.
Yes, NRIs can claim Section 80C deductions for eligible instruments like Life Insurance, ELSS.
Yes, but deduction will be limited to Rs. 1.5 lakh.
If the tenure of the FD is equal to or greater than 5 years (typically called tax saving FDs), deduction is allowed under section 80C.
Yes, tuition fees paid to a university, college, school or other educational institution in India for full-time education can be claimed as a deduction under section 80C
ULIPs can be claimed as a deduction under section 80C
Yes. NRIs can claim deduction under section 80C.
Section 80CCE prescribes that the combined limit under section 80C, 80CCC and 80CCD(1) does not exceed Rs. 1.5 lakhs.
ICICI Prudential Technology Fund Direct Plan Growth
Aditya Birla Sun Life Tax Relief 96 Growth
Aditya Birla Sun Life Digital India Fund Direct Plan Growth
SBI Technology Opportunities Fund Direct Growth
Clear offers taxation & financial solutions to individuals, businesses, organizations & chartered accountants in India. Clear serves 1.5+ Million happy customers, 20000+ CAs & tax experts & 10000+ businesses across India.
Efiling Income Tax Returns(ITR) is made easy with Clear platform. Just upload your form 16, claim your deductions and get your acknowledgment number online. You can efile income tax return on your income from salary, house property, capital gains, business & profession and income from other sources. Further you can also file TDS returns, generate Form-16, use our Tax Calculator software, claim HRA, check refund status and generate rent receipts for Income Tax Filing.
CAs, experts and businesses can get GST ready with Clear GST software & certification course. Our GST Software helps CAs, tax experts & business to manage returns & invoices in an easy manner. Our Goods & Services Tax course includes tutorial videos, guides and expert assistance to help you in mastering Goods and Services Tax. Clear can also help you in getting your business registered for Goods & Services Tax Law.
Save taxes with Clear by investing in tax saving mutual funds (ELSS) online. Our experts suggest the best funds and you can get high returns by investing directly or through SIP. Download Black by ClearTax App to file returns from your mobile phone.
Office Address - Defmacro Software Private Limited, C 245A, Ground floor, Room No 1, Vikas Puri, West Delhi, New Delhi, Delhi 110018, India
Cleartax is a product by Defmacro Software Pvt. Ltd.