Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
Elevate processes with AI automation and vendor delight
Streamline vendor management and collaboration in one unified portal
Maximise EBITDA with early vendor payments
Connected finance ecosystem for process automation, greater control, higher savings and productivity
Complete supply chain solution for ultimate control, effortless collaboration, and assured compliance
Find out how the latest Union Budget 2026 updates impact your tax
National Pension Scheme (NPS) 2025 - Details, Tax Benefits, Login, Online Registration & Returns
National Pension Scheme (NPS) India is a long-term investment plan for retirement under the purview of the
Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority
(PFRDA) and the Central Government. Investments can be made in NPS Tier-I account  (deduction up to Rs. 2 lakhs available  under section 80CCD) or both NPS Tier-I and Tier-II account.
Account can be held by individuals up to 85 years of age.
On retirement, 100% withdrawal can be made if the corpus balance is up to Rs 8 lakhs.
Up to 80% of corpus can be withdrawn for non-government employees (60% for government employee).
The NPS withdrawal rules has been amended recently through an
by Pension Fund Regulatory Authority of India. NPS account can now be maintained by a person of age up to 85 years. Key changes in withdrawal limits are as follows:
Superannuation / 60 years / Incapacitation
To promote savings and investments, and help the citizens to plan their retirement.
Only Indian citizens aged between 18 to 85 years.
Tier-I Account: Mandatory for government employers, optional for others
For Tier I: Rs. 1000 per annum, Rs.500 for account opening
For Tier II: Rs. 250 for account opening.
Active choice: The investor can choose equity allocation, whether it is equity oriented, debt oriented or bonds.
Passive choice: Equity allocation is chosen based on age of the account owner.
On retirement, at least 20% of the funds should be chosen as annuity. (40% for government employees)
The returns in this scheme depends on market performance, there is no fixed returns in the form of interest.
National Pension Scheme is open to employees of the public, private and even the unorganized sectors, except those from the armed forces.
It encourages people to invest in a pension account at regular intervals during their employment.
After retirement, the subscribers can take out a certain percentage of the corpus.
The remaining amount is paid as a monthly pension post your retirement.
scheme, parents can open an NPS account for their minor children and contribute an amount every month or year until they reach 18 years old.
Once the children are 18 years old, they can manage the account independently by converting the NPS Vatsalya account into a normal NPS account.
As per recent announcements made in budget 2025, all the tax benefits offered to NPS scheme is also extended to NPS vatsalya accounts.
The NPS is a good scheme for anyone who wants to plan for their retirement early on and has a low-risk appetite.
Any person fulfilling the following eligibility criteria can join NPS:
Should be an Indian citizen (resident or non-resident) or a Non-Resident Indian (NRI).
Should comply with the Know Your Customer (KYC) norms detailed in the application form.
Should be legally competent to execute a contract as per the Indian Contract Act.
Overseas citizen of India (OCI), Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) and Hindu Undivided Families (HUFs) are not eligible to subscribe to NPS.
NPS is an individual pension account, thus it cannot be opened on behalf of a third person.
NPS account can be opened by a Indian citizen ( including a Non-Residential Indian) is 18 to 70 years.
This scheme has been in effect for over a decade, and so far has delivered 11% to 20% annualized
Though this scheme does not guarantee a fixed rate of
, it has earned a better returns than other tax saving investments.
Currently, there is a cap in the range of 50% to 75% on equity exposure
For government employees and senior citizens, this cap is 50%
There are two options to invest in – auto choice or active choice.
Auto choice sets your investment risk based on age—older investors get more stable, lower-risk options.
The active choice allows you to decide on the scheme and to split your investments.
in a financial year and change the number of subscriptions.
They can choose their own investment options.
You are also allowed the option to change your fund manager if you are not happy with the performance of the fund.
They can operate their account online from anywhere and continue it even when they change their city and employment.
The scheme is portable across jobs and locations.
A person can withdraw up to 80% of the total corpus as a lump amount after retirement, with the remaining 20% going into an annuity plan.
Goverment employees can withdraw up to 60% of the total corpus and opt for annuity for the remaining 40%.
Subscriber has the option to withdraw the desired amount systematically at regular periodic intervals. i.e, monthly, quarterly, half-yearly or yearly.
Subscribers can withdraw the entire corpus if it is up to Rs 8 lakh without opting an annuity plan.
Though withdrawals are tax-free, an annuity is taxable in
In the event of a premature exit (before reaching the age of superannuation/turning 60), at least 80% of the pension corpus must be used to purchase an Annuity.
If the total corpus is less than or equal to Rs.5 lakh, the subscriber can opt for 100% lump-sum withdrawal.
Following the subscriber's death, the entire accrued pension corpus (100%) would be paid to the subscriber's nominee/legal heir.
It is to be noted that NPS Tier-II account can be withdrawn anytime, it has no lock-in period.
As NPS is a scheme where its returns depends on market performance of the fund irrespective of equity allocation, there is no fixed interest rate for this scheme, unlike other savings scheme. The returns depend on various factors like:
National Pension Scheme accounts are broadly classified into Tier-I and Tier-II accounts.
Tier-II account is optional, which can be opened by Tier-I account holders.
between Tier-I and Tier-II accounts are given below:
Central/state govt. employees (optional for other employer)
₹500 per contribution (₹1,000/year minimum)
₹250 per contribution (no annual minimum)
Restricted till age 60 (partial allowed in specific cases)
Under Sec 80C (up to ₹1.5 lakh) + Sec 80CCD(1B) (₹50k extra)
No tax benefit (except govt. employees under 80C with 3-year lock-in)
Restrictions apply; annuity purchase mandatory
The PFRDA regulates NPS with transparent investment norms, regular performance reviews, and monitoring of fund managers by NPS Trust.
National Pension Scheme Tier-I Tax Benefits  - Section 80CCD
Employees who contribute to NPS can claim the following tax benefits on their contributions:
Tax deduction of up to 10% of salary (Basic + DA) under Section
, subject to a maximum of Rs.1.5 lakh under Section 80CCE.
Tax deduction of up to Rs.50,000 under Section 80CCD(1B), along with the overall limit of Rs.1.5 lakh under Section 80CCE.
The aforesaid deductions cannot be claimed under the
, deduction can be claimed for employer's contribution towards NPS up to 10% of salary (14% in case of new regime).
can be claimed as deduction irrespective of regime chosen.
Self-employed individuals who contribute to NPS can claim the following tax benefits on their own contributions:
under Section 80CCD(1B), along with the overall limit of Rs.1.5 lakh under Section 80CCE.
The aforesaid deductions cannot be claimed under the
from NPS are eligible for tax exemption when the amount withdrawn is up to 25% of self-contribution, subject to the circumstances and criteria prescribed by PFRDA under section 10(12B).
Section 10 provides a tax exemption on a lump sum withdrawal of 60% of accrued NPS funds upon reaching 60 years or superannuation.
Tax exemption is provided on annuity purchase or superannuation at 60 years under Section 80CCD(5). However, the subsequent income from an annuity is taxed under Section 80CCD(3).
National Pension Scheme Tier-II Tax Benefits - Section 80C
NPS Tier-II account is an optional account that can be opened by Tier-I account holders.
Contribution made to Tier-II accounts can be claimed as a deduction under section 80C of the Income Tax Act.
A minimum lock-in period of 3 years is required to claim this deduction.
Up to Rs. 1.5 lakh of contribution can be claimed as a deduction, subject to the combined threshold limit under section 80C.
This deduction cannot be availed under the new tax regime.
NPS gives you option to choose from fund managers, and also you can choose your exposure to equity. If you are an aggressive investor, you can choose highly equity oriented funds, and vice versa.
Even if you switch jobs, you can contribute to your NPS account without any significant paperwork.
NPS provides one of the lowest fund manager charges, leaving more money for investment and accumulation as compared to other funds.
NPS is a well structured pension plan, which assists you to plan your retirement and prepare a steady income flowing mechanism post retirement.
As already mentioned, the government has launched Unified Pension Scheme (UPS) as an option under NPS. It guarantees a minimum pension amount on completion of a certain number of years of service. The key differences between NPS and UPS are tabulated below:
National Pension System was started to promote savings and investments, and help the citizens to plan their retirement.
Unified Pension Scheme is an option under National Pension Scheme, guaranteeing a minimum monthly payout on retirement
Only Central Government employees who are already covered under NPS.(retirees of NPS can also opt for UPS)
Deductions under section 80C, 80CCD(2) are available under the Income Tax Act.
The deductions available to NPS is also extended to UPS.
No guaranteed minimum pension amount in this scheme.
Rs. 10,000 of guaranteed pension amount available under this scheme.
10% of basic salary + Dearness Allowance (DA)
10% of basic salary + Dearness Allowance (DA)
14% of basic salary + Dearness Allowance (DA)
8.5% of basic salary + Dearness Allowance (DA)
50% of average basic pay over the last 12 months (for employees with 25+ years of service)
in less than half an hour. Opening an account online (
) is easy, if you link your account to your
You can validate the registration using the OTP sent to your mobile. This will generate a PRAN (Permanent Retirement Account Number), which you can use for
You can login to your NPS account either through
For NSDL and Kfintech login, you will require the user ID and password to login. The user ID is Permanent Retirement Account Number (PRAN) for login under both the websites.
NPS Toll-Free Number For Registered Subscriber (with PRAN):
Hence, consider investing in the NPS scheme if the benefits elaborated above match your risk profile and investment goal. However, if you are open to more equity exposure, many mutual funds are catering to investors from diverse backgrounds available.
Should I include employer’s contribution to NPS in my taxable salary?
Jeevan Pramaan 2025: Digital Life Certificate, Pramaan ID, RD Service and How to Download
Maximize Your Refund, Minimize The Effort.
How much monthly pension will I get from NPS?
The monthly pension that you get from NPS will depend on various factors, such as asset classes you invested in, duration of investment and the amount of contribution. You can calculate the monthly pension and tax benefits you can avail of through the
First of all, NPS can be equity oriented or debt oriented depending on the choice and age of the investors. The funds are either invested in equity, debt or government securities based on the choice of the investors. The debt and government securities offer a return range of 7.5 to 11.2% as per the recent updates.
NPS Tier I account is a long term investment option, mandatory for government employees and optional for others. Those who have NPS Tier I account can choose to open NPS Tier II account. Tier II account is in the nature of a savings account.
Yes. You can partially withdraw 25% of your contributions after the completion of three years for specific reasons such as illness, education or marriage of children, disability, purchasing property or starting a new venture.
managers in the country. The performance of funds vary on a year-to-year basis.
Any Indian citizen aged between 18-70 years is eligible to subscribe to NPS, including Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) and overseas Indians. However, they should be legally competent to execute a contract as per the Indian Contract Act. Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) and Hindu Undivided Families (HUFs) are not eligible to subscribe to NPS.
No one cannot have more than one NPS account.
Yes, an NRI can open an NPS account. Contributions made by NRI are subject to regulatory requirements as prescribed by RBI and FEMA from time to time. However, OCI (Overseas Citizens of India) and PIO (Person of Indian Origin) card holders and HUFs are not eligible for opening of NPS account.
In the event of the death of a subscriber before attaining the age of 60 years, what will be the benefit that is payable and who will get the benefits?
On the death of the subscriber, the entire accumulated pension wealth of the subscriber shall be paid to the nominee of such subscriber. Also, the nominee or family members of the deceased subscriber shall have the option to purchase any of the annuities being offered upon exit if they so desire.
Employees in private sector can have an EPF account and also subscribe to NPS scheme.
How much withdrawal amount of NPS is tax-free?
60% of the total corpus withdrawn in lumpsum is exempt from tax.
Can I claim 80CCD(1B) and 80C together for NPS?
Yes, you can claim deduction under both section 80C and 80CCD(1B), but the overall deduction claimed should not exceed RS. 2 lakhs.
Contribution to NPS Tier-II account can be claimed as a deduction under section 80C if it has 3 year lock in period.
Tier-I accounts need to be held till maturity, while premature withdrawal is possible. There is no specific lock-in period for Tier-II accounts, but funds need to be maintained for at least 3 years to claim deduction under section 80C.
ICICI Prudential Technology Fund Direct Plan Growth
Aditya Birla Sun Life Tax Relief 96 Growth
Aditya Birla Sun Life Digital India Fund Direct Plan Growth
SBI Technology Opportunities Fund Direct Growth
Clear offers taxation & financial solutions to individuals, businesses, organizations & chartered accountants in India. Clear serves 1.5+ Million happy customers, 20000+ CAs & tax experts & 10000+ businesses across India.
Efiling Income Tax Returns(ITR) is made easy with Clear platform. Just upload your form 16, claim your deductions and get your acknowledgment number online. You can efile income tax return on your income from salary, house property, capital gains, business & profession and income from other sources. Further you can also file TDS returns, generate Form-16, use our Tax Calculator software, claim HRA, check refund status and generate rent receipts for Income Tax Filing.
CAs, experts and businesses can get GST ready with Clear GST software & certification course. Our GST Software helps CAs, tax experts & business to manage returns & invoices in an easy manner. Our Goods & Services Tax course includes tutorial videos, guides and expert assistance to help you in mastering Goods and Services Tax. Clear can also help you in getting your business registered for Goods & Services Tax Law.
Save taxes with Clear by investing in tax saving mutual funds (ELSS) online. Our experts suggest the best funds and you can get high returns by investing directly or through SIP. Download Black by ClearTax App to file returns from your mobile phone.
Office Address - Defmacro Software Private Limited, C 245A, Ground floor, Room No 1, Vikas Puri, West Delhi, New Delhi, Delhi 110018, India
Cleartax is a product by Defmacro Software Pvt. Ltd.